Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie (HZB)
----------------------------------------------------------

HZB minted four DOIs with DataCite for HZB instruments: two beamlines
at the neutron source BER II;\ [#hzb_e2]_\ :sup:`,`\ [#hzb_e9]_ one
beamline at the synchrotron light source BESSY II;\ [#hzb_nc_bl]_ and
one experimental station at BESSY II.\ [#hzb_nc_st]_ The DOIs resolve
to the respective instrument page from the HZB instrument database
that did already exist before and was thus not created for this
purpose.  One particularity with these instruments is that they are
custom built by HZB.  Thus, in the metadata HZB appears as `Creator`
as well as `Contributor` with property `contributorType` value
`HostingInstitution`.  It is noteworthy that one of the DOIs uses the
additional property `fundingReference` from the DataCite schema to
acknowledge external funding that HZB received for upgrading the
instrument.  This property was not considered in the PIDINST schema,
or in the DataCite mapping.  HZB plans to continue the adoption and to
mint DOIs for all its beamlines and experimental stations that are in
user operation in the near future.

British Oceanographic Data Centre (BODC)
----------------------------------------

The British Oceanographic Data Centre (BODC) is a national facility
for preserving and distributing oceanographic and marine data.  BODC
tested the ePIC implementation in web-published, sensor technical
metadata descriptions encoded in the Open Geospatial Consortium’s
(OGC) `SensorML`_ open standards for conceptualising and integrating
real-world sensors.  In an initial test case, a PID was minted for a
Sea-Bird Scientific SBE37 Microcat regularly deployed on fixed-point
moorings in the `Porcupine Abyssal Plain Sustained Observatory
(PAP-SO) <PAP-SO_>`_ in the north Atlantic.  For further details see
:ref:`landing-page-encoding-swe`.  BODC plan to continue adoption
identifying sensors on large research vessels owned by the Natural
Environment Research Council (NERC) and managed by the National
Oceanography Centre (NOC) and British Antarctic Survey (BAS).  PIDs
will be used to manage sensor data and metadata workflows from ‘deck
to desktop’ as part of a UK initiative, I/Ocean.

EISCAT3D
--------

`EISCAT3D`_ will be an international research infrastructure, using
radar observations and the incoherent scatter technique for studies of
the atmosphere and near-Earth space environment above the
Fenno-Scandinavian Arctic as well as for the support of the solar
system and radio astronomy sciences.  EISCAT3D will implement
persistent identification for instruments following the
recommendations by PIDINST.  The radar is complex, more digital than
previous radars, and is roughly divided into a number of separate
units.  While software is a substantial constituent of these units,
they can be regarded as hardware units, each persistently identified.
Updates to the units will be primarily to software and result in new
unit versions with own PIDs.  The radar itself can also be
persistently identified and the relation type HasComponent can be used
to relate to the persistently identified units.

SENSOR.awi.de and PANGAEA
-------------------------

The Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine
Research (AWI) has been continuously committed to develop and sustain
an eResearch infrastructure for coherent discovery, view,
dissemination, and archival of scientific data and related information
in polar and marine regions.  In order to address the increasing
heterogeneity of research platforms and respective devices and sensors
along with varying project-driven requirements, a generic and modular
framework has been built intended to support the flow of sensor
observations to archives (O2A).\ [#koppe2015]_ In this context,
SENSOR.awi.de, available since 2015, is an O2A component dedicated to
the registry of research platforms, devices and sensors and in the
meantime in use by several international partners (e.g. MOSAiC
project).  SENSOR.awi.de has been built using OGC SensorML standard
and all individual records, to date over 4000, are assigned a
persistent identifier using UUIDs in the handle syntax along with
automated generation of a record citation.  Terminologies (e.g.,
controlled vocabularies) are used to define sensor categories (NERC
L05) as well as sensor types and models (NERC L22).  The data model of
SENSOR.awi.de is compliant with the PIDINST schema and the additional
implementation of Datacite DOIS for sensors is to date under
evaluation.  The ultimate goal of SENSOR.awi.de is to enhance the
quality of published and archived data in PANGAEA by providing
complete metadata and persistent identifiers on instruments and
sensors used in the data acquisition process
(:numref:`fig-link-pangea`).  Given that platforms and sensors evolve
in time (sensors are being calibrated, instrument payload changes,
etc), SENSOR.awi.de also supports record versioning by maintaining an
audit trail of changes in the XML record.

PANGAEA is a digital repository for environmental research data and
the dedicated long term archive within the O2A framework jointly
operated by the AWI and MARUM (University Bremen).  Each dataset is
made available with its descriptive metadata, including the relations
with research resources (e.g., articles, funder, instrument and
specimen, if applicable).  As a data provider, PANGAEA only curates
limited information of a device such as device name, identifier and
type.  As an effort to standardize device type and name, currently the
repository applies external terminologies, in particular the NERC L05
device category vocabulary and the L22 device catalogue.  The
repository has developed tailor-made client applications to import
these terminologies in a periodic, incremental manner.  For both the
persistent identification as well as for the detailed description of
instruments, PANGAEA thus relies on institutional instrument
registries such as SENSOR.awi.de and uses their issued PIDs to
uniquely identify instruments which have been used to acquire data
archived at PANGAEA.  Since AWI and PANGAEA use the same
vocabularies/terminologies as well as PIDs to represent devices, they
facilitate easy integration of datasets in particular during transfer
of near real time data from O2A raw data staging areas via data
quality control services etc to their final destination, the PANGAEA
data archive.\ [#koppe2015]_

ICOS
----

The Integrated Carbon Observation System (ICOS) is a pan-european
research infrastructure for quantifying and understanding the
greenhouse gas balance of the European continent.  It conducts many
continuous in-situ measurements like gas concentrations, wind speed
and direction, humidity, temperature, etc.  To deliver high quality
measurement data, ICOS considers the adoption of a persistent
identifier for instruments a must for documenting data provenance and
tracking calibration history.

B2INST
------

B2INST is a service for registering, persistently identifying and
describing instruments.  The B2INST service fills the gap especially
for research groups or smaller communities, who might lack the
capability to operate a registry.

Communities and organisations can make use of the service to FAIRify
their instrument by registering their metadata and assigning the
instrument a PID.  This instrument-PID can then be added to research
outputs, such as journal articles and datasets.

B2INST provides several generic features, like assigning PIDs and DOIs
to the metadata, as well as presenting a landing page of the
instrument based on the registered metadata.  It also provides
additional features, like the possibility to upload data to the
registered instruments (such additional data can be almost everything
that supports the description of the instrument, e.g. calibration
protocols, pictures of the instruments, technical manuals, etc).  In
B2INST, the registered information is publicly available for everyone.
Creating or maintaining information requires authorization - for that
B2INST supports federated identity management, so users can use their
home accounts to log in to the system.

The identified use cases showed that communities have different
requirements for instrument metadata.  The PIDINST schema covers a
minimum set of metadata to describe instruments only.  B2INST provides
community extensions; thus, it is possible to add broader descriptions
of instruments and to support the requirements of different
communities.  Based on the PIDINST schema, communities can add
metadata extensions to better support their community needs.

The current plan foresees that B2INST will be offered as a public
service by EUDAT.  The initial proof-of-concept was set up by SURF.
It was further developed by the GWDG, which will operate the service
in a production mode.

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
-----------------------------------------------------

Recently, a group of researchers collaborating with the Office of Data
and Informatics at NIST had deployed a proto-instance of an instrument
database.  It is our hope that this database will becomes a living
record of all instruments from NIST.  We view the persistent
identification of research instruments as an essential attribute
anyone engaged in the production of high-quality and reproducible
science.

We chose the SharePoint platform as our evaluation portal for the ease
of setting up an internal facing web interface.  We made a SharePoint
List object based on the RDA PIDINST schema v1.0 release.  Next, we
populated the columns using two data sources.  The first is the NIST
electron microscopy Nexus microscope inventory.  The second the NIST
Sunflower property databases.  For the Sunflower property database, we
limited our results to only instruments listed under a single division
with NIST so that our feasibility study stayed manageable.  In all,
there are 600+ instruments in the proto-database.

From the two data sources, we were able to populate many of the
required columns but not all.  For the `LandingPage` requirement,
since the vast majority of our instruments do not have landing pages,
we programmatically generated these with the Pelican static site
generator using Sunflower property data.  The pages with
internally-resolvable IP addresses are added to a local web host with
the understanding that some of these can be made public at NIST’s
discretion.  For the `Identifier` requirement, we minted these using
Handle, and then imported them into SharePoint.  For fields like
`Owner` and `ownerName`, NIST is identified as the top-level owner.
However, it is our hope that instrument custodians will self-report as
second or third-line owners as the practice of persistent identifier
for instruments take root.  It is worth mentioning that SharePoint
List objects are not capable of having nested (1-n) objects.
Therefore, our instrument database remains in prototype stage until a
suitable database is identified.  This work is on-going.

Natural Environmental Data Service (EDS)
----------------------------------------

The `NERC Environmental Data Service (EDS) <EDS_>`_ is a trusted UK facility
providing data stewardship services for environmental data across
all environmental science domains. The EDS is made up of five data
centres with domain specific expertise; the British Oceanographic
Data Centre (BODC), Centre for Environmental Data Analysis (CEDA),
Environmental Information Data Centre (EIDC), National Geoscience
Data Centre (NGDS), and UK Polar Data Centre (PDC). The NERC-supported
EDS brings the data centres together to provide an integrated data
service across all environmental science domains. As part of the
Research Data Cloud Pilot project funded by the UK Research and
Innovation Council (UKRI), the EDS will prototype digital
infrastructure to cite graphs of all the PIDs used to generate
formal environmental data collections derived from sensors.
These graphs (or 'reliquaries' of complex citations) will include
persistent identifiers for instruments following the PIDINST
recommendations.

.. _SensorML:
   https://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sensorml

.. _PAP-SO:
   https://projects.noc.ac.uk/pap/

.. _EISCAT3D:
   https://eiscat.se/business/eiscat3d7/

.. _EDS:
   https://eds.ukri.org/

.. [#hzb_e2]
   https://doi.org/10.5442/NI000001

.. [#hzb_e9]
   https://doi.org/10.5442/NI000002

.. [#hzb_nc_bl]
   https://doi.org/10.5442/NI000003

.. [#hzb_nc_st]
   https://doi.org/10.5442/NI000004

.. [#koppe2015]
   Koppe, R., Gerchow, P., Macario, A., Haas, A., Schäfer-Neth, C.
   and Pfeiffenberger, H. (2015): O2A: A Generic Framework for Enabling
   the Flow of Sensor Observations to Archives and Publications, OCEANS
   2015 Genova. doi: 10.1109/OCEANS-Genova.2015.7271657
